
Long story short, Economic Integration is achieved mainly from trade liberalisation. What we question here is, however, to what extent
does opening up the economy to the foreign countries promote effective Economic Development.
Under the empirical evidences of trade liberalisation we address to the case of the Pacific Arch. A process in which we can distinguish
3 different phases:
	
  	- The case of Japan; (not an example of trade liberalization, quite the opposite)
	- The Asian Tigers (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan)
	- The 2nd Generation of Industrialised countries (Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and China)

The mentioned region was not exactly wealthy nor in resources and capital. Nevertheless the labor is abundant, disciplined, capable and
rather cheap.


### Stephen Smith, "Case studies in Economic Devlopment" - 139-146, Industrial and Export Policy in South Korea

We ought to refer South Korea (now will be referred simply as Korea) as an example in which trade liberalisation effectively promoted a
sustained growth of the national economy. We are talking about a country which is poor in natural resources with a scarce cultivable
land. A country composed by a widely agrarian and feudalistic society. In the early 60’s unemployment and poverty were reaching extreme
levels. Well South Korea is now one of the highly industrialised economies of the world, representing a fair share of the world’s trade
and a already well established developed country.

The gradual growth of Korea was outlined in three different policy steps: (1)Import Substitution, 1954 - 1960; (2) Outward orientation,
1961-1979; (3) Balance and consolidation.

The first step taken is a clear change of route for the Korean economy, switching from a Import- Substituting country to a Exporting
intensive country. In raw terms, as if the former industries are boosted in such way that it allows openness to other countries.

In the early 60’s Korea started by eliminating tariffs on imported inputs and capital goods given that these promote an export expansion
industry. As in Westphal and Kim (1977) this was the most relevant policy towards exports-expansion. The coming decades, starting in
1970, were characterised by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)- now known as the World Trade Organisation (WTO)- sets
promoted for global tariff reduction, namely the Kennedy Round and the Tokyo Round which allowed for a gradual reduction of tariff rates
from around 40 percent all the way to 13 percent. 

Lower tariffs facilitated specialisation which allowed for an increase in total factor productivity, in raw terms, productivity. Also
with the tariffs being lower it enabled the import of investment goods which allows for capital accumulation - essential for a solid
industrialisation process. These factors are generally associated with an increase in per capita GDP as was the case. The Korean
government made the conditions favourable for the export oriented sectors, so they could compete against the highly industrialised USA,
UK and even Japan. As stated in Westphal(1990): “Korea’s industrial performance owes a great deal to the government’s promotional
policies toward exports and to its initiatives in targeting industries for development. If nothing else, policies towards exports have
created an atmosphere--rare in the Third World--in which businessmen could be certain that the economic system would respond to and
subsequently reward their efforts aimed at expanding and upgrading exports.” 

Looking at South Korea now we have a solidified nation. One in which the income gap is rather low. The industries here located tend to
use state-of-the-art technology which promotes also higher levels of education - ultimately resulting in a skilled and high-income
labor.

As further evidence for the benefits of free trade we propose the not so successful case of India during approximately the same time
period. Even though India managed to increase its GDP growth rate (between 1950 and 1980) this increase in the growth rate was nowhere
near that witnessed in Korea. The focus on protectionism in India was such that in the 1970’s all imports went under strict license,
reaching a level of nearly 3 percent of the GDP in 1975/76.


All in all during 1960-1980 the average per capita GDP growth was 6.3 percent for Korea and only 1.1 percent in India. While Korea
managed to turn towards an outward-oriented trade regime India followed a protectionist approach. The fact that the Indian government
followed an import-substituting policy did not allow for at least the import of inputs of higher quality such that the efficiency levels
could be increased.


In contrast to what was the case in the Asian countries, Latin American countries such as Brazil and Mexico did not observe the same
favorable effects of trade growth. In Mexico, according to, a 10% reduction in tariff levels was associated with 2-3% reduction in
employment; the wage differential between skilled and unskilled workers sharply increased, while real wages of unskilled workers
declined (Ravenga, 1994). The most fundamental reason pointed out for this result was the predominant wage flexibility. In Brazil, the
trade liberalization that took place in the early 1990s caused a short-term 32.4% drop in employment in capital-intensive industries due
to a sharp increase in productivity. Furthermore, as the domestic market opened its borders to new import-products, the export
performance of the country degraded, causing a 13.3% decline in the employment of labor-intensive industries (Mesquita & Najberg, 2000). 


Looking back at the framework of economic models, such as the Hecksher-Ohlin and the Stolper-Samuelson model, we see that contrary to
their predictions wage inequality has increased after trade liberalization in several countries. Outsourcing and the relocation of 
labor-intensive parts of production processes from advanced to developing countries play also part in this phenomenon. This is not to 
say that the models are necessarily invalid, since Asian countries had quite an opposite experience, but rather to indicate that 
country-specific and contingent factors are important when discussing the benefits of trade liberalization. The difference between Latin 
American and Asian countries was that in Latin American countries there were problems of macroeconomic management, an extremely unequal 
distribution of assets, and an overdependence on external resources. Asian countries instead, moved towards a more neutral trade regime 
through selective export-promotion policies. The successful implementation of such an interventionist strategy of promoting infant 
industries and “picking winners” in industrial policy requires a strong state and an efficient administration, conditions that are not 
widely met in developing countries. To this extent therefore such a strategy may not be widely replicable even if underlying economic 
circumstances make it potentially feasible. 


In general, there is no question for the beneficial role of trade liberalization in terms of its growth, employment and distributional
implications. Nowadays, strong advocates of trade liberalization make a case that the sooner and more extensively trade is liberalized 
the greater the benefits will be. These propositions rest on the assumptions such as the existence of perfect competition, fully 
employed resources (including labour), only constant returns to scale in production, and that trade will always be balanced. 
Notwithstanding, the assumptions in question do not materialize in the real world, where, especially in developing countries, market 
imperfections are common and industrial production is characterized by economies of scale. Moreover, even endogenous growth theories 
suggest that trade restrictions may also be associated with higher rates of growth of output whenever the restrictions promote 
technologically more dynamic sectors over others. 





Arvind Panagariya (2003)
Connolly and Yi (2008)
Kim (1991)
Case Studies in Economic Development, Stephen C. Smith, 3rd edition
